Background
==========
The 'Quite universal circuit simulator' Qucs (pronounced: kju:ks) is an open source circuit simulator developed by a group of engineers, scientists and mathematicians under the GNU General Public License (GPL). Qucs was originally the brain-child of German Engineer Michael Margraf. Following Qucs initial release to the public in 2003 around twenty contributors, from all regions of the world, have invested their expertise and time to support the development of the software. Both binary and source code releases take place at regular intervals. Qucs numbered releases and day-to-day development code snapshots can be downloaded from http:qucs.sourceforge.net. Versions are available for Linux (Ubuntu and others), MAC OSX and the Windows(C) 32 bit operating system.  In the period since Qucs was first released it has evolved into an advanced circuit simulation and device modelling tool with a user friendly "graphical user interface" (GUI) for circuit schematic capture, for investigating circuit and device properties from DC through RF to Optical frequencies, and for launching other circuit simulation software, including for example the FreeHDL (VHDL) and Icarus Verilog digital circuit simulators. Qucs includes built-in code for processing and visualising simulation output data. Qucs also allows users to process post-simulation data with the popular Octave numerical data analysis package. Similarly, circuit performance optimisation is possible using the SPICE ASCO package or Python code linked to Qucs.  Since 2003, to January 2015, the sourceforge Qucs download statistics show that over one million downloads of the software have been recorded. As well as extensive circuit simulation capabilities Qucs supports a number of device modelling features, including non-linear and RF equation-defined device modelling and the use of the Verilog-A hardware description language (HDL) for compact device modelling and macromodelling. Recent extensions to the software aim to diversify the Qucs modelling facilities by running the Berkeley "Model and Algorithm Prototyping Platform" (MAPP) via Octave launched from the Qucs GUI. In the future, as the Qucs project evolves, the software will also provide circuit designers with a choice of simulation engine selected from Qucs built-in, ngspice and Xyce (C). 

Qucs is a large and complex software package which takes time to learn. Incidentally, this statement applies equally to other GPL circuit simulators. New users must realise that to get the best from the software some effort is required on their part. In particular, like all new subjects, one of the best ways to become familiar with Qucs is to learn a few basic user rules and how to apply them. Once these are mastered users can move on to next level of understanding with confidence.  Eventually, a stage will be reached which allows Qucs to be used productively to model devices and to investigate the performance of circuits.  Qucs is equally easy to use for absolute beginners, like school children learning the physics of electrical circuits consisting of a battery and one or more resistors, as it is for cutting edge engineers working on the modelling of sub-nano sized MOS transistors, with hundreds of physical parameters, essential to RF integrated circuit design. 

The primary purpose of these notes is to provide Qucs users with a source of reference for the operation and capabilities of the software. The information provided also indicates known limitations of each Qucs feature and, if available, provides details of any work-around. Qucs is a high level scientific/engineering tool whos operation and performance does require users to understand the basic mathematical, scientific and engineering principles underlying the operation of electronic devices and the design and analysis of electronic circuits.  Hence, the individual sections of the Qucs-Help document include material of a technical nature mixed in with details of the software operation.  Most sections of the document introduce a number of worked circuit design and simulation examples. These have been graded to help readers with different levels of understand get the best from the Qucs circuit simulator.  Qucs-Help is a dynamic document which will change with every new release of the Qucs software. At this time, Qucs release 0.0.18, the document is far from complete but given time it will improve. 
